Homework 3

Each study reports an estimate deltaT, a standard deviation of that estimate sdev as a
measure of uncertainty, the proxy used (coded 1 to 8), whether it was a terrestrial or marine
study (T/M), which is coded as 0 for Terrestrial, 1 for Marine, and the latitude at which data
were collected (latitude).

1. Write down a general linear model that allows a different intercept for each proxy as well
as separate coefficients for latitude and latitude squared for each proxy and a variance
for each observation that is proportional to the measured standard deviation squared.

___

2. What is the rank of the design matrix?

___

3. Consider the following R code:
X = model.matrix(deltaT ∼ factor(proxy)*poly(latitude, 2), data=climate)

What is the rank of X? Do the columns of X span the same space as describe in part
1? Explain what the code does and provide an interpretation of what the parameters
mean (use the help() function in R).

___

4. Using the above model forumula, fit the generalized linear model using the column sdev
to construct appropriate weights. Provide an interpretation of each of the parameters
in the context of the data; i.e. quantify and interpret how changes of “1 unit” (or
more) relate to climate change. This interpretation should understandable by someone
with little statistical backgound.

___

5. Using the model output, construct confidence intervals that address each of the following
questions:
1. Do estimates vary systematically by proxy?
2. Does latitude affect the temperature change?
3. Do terrestrial estimates differ from marine estimates?
4. Are some proxies more precise than others?

Sumarize your results in a one page report (one page of tables & plots may be attached),
with a brief summary (non-statistical but that provides quantification and measures
of uncertainty of key results), introduction, model description, results, and discussion.
For discussion, what other simpler models might be appropriate to try out as suggested
by your intervals?

No need to fit any alternative models or carry out a formal hypothesis test at this point in
time to address the questions, but use confidence intervals as a form of EDA (exploratory
data analysis).

___

Please turn in a typed solution (pdf file by email is fine, of course). In your solutions
please make sure that all graphs have a legend and/or caption that defines colors, lines
etc, units are given, and axes are clearly labeled. Any graphs that are included should be
referenced in the text by Figure 1, etc. (if you do not refer or discuss it do not include it!).
Please do not submit R code, only the salient results.
2